Metro D Dual ADCs (#414)
vatpac-technology/sops: docs/aerodromes/classd/Bankstown.md

Refer to [Class D Tower Separation Standards](../../../separation-standards/classd) for more information.

### Dual ADC Operations

> Airspace Ownership when ADC 2 is online, is split down the middle of the **11C/29C** and **11R/29L** extended centrelines.

Author: Are there any risks associated with leaving it how its currently published? Ie for simplicity?

> Airspace Ownership when ADC 2 is online, is split down the middle of the **11C/29C** and **11R/29L** extended centrelines.

Reviewer: Technically more complicated as written. For example, TWRN inbound (RWY 29) should contact ADC1 for clearance. Joining instruction of "Join crosswind 29R, M15" cuts through ADC2's airspace and would require coordination. Same with tfc inbound via PNP for either RWY configs... normally expected to overfly at A015 to join northern CCT.
Creating the shelf reduces coordination and frequency management.

Circuits to be flown at `A010`

## Adjacent Runways
### Proximity
There is 106 metres between the centrelines of Runway **11R/29L** & **11C/29C**, and 106 metres between the centrelines of Runway **11C/29C** & **11L/29R**.
Due to the close proximity in critical stages of flight, there are additional considerations (below).

> ### Dependent Runway Operatiions (Departures Only)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Dependent Runway Operations (Departures Only)
```

At Bankstown, all Runways are considered Independent unless a Multi-Engined OR Jet aircraft departs from an adjacent Runway. 
In this instance, runways are treated as dependent *for departures ONLY*. Controllers should apply the same Runway standard across all dependant Runways. Arriving aircraft are exempt from this clause.

Definitions;
Independent: Runways can operate simultaneously without restriction.
Dependent: Runways are operated with restrictions, often one at a time.

> Example A; A King Air (Multi-Engine) is ready to depart Runway 29R. A Cherokee is departing Runway 29L. Runways are not adjacent, and are therefore independent of eachother.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example A; A King Air (Multi-Engine) is ready to depart Runway 29R. A Cherokee is departing Runway 29L. Runways are not adjacent, and are therefore independent of each other.
```

    <span class="hotline">**BK ADC** -> **SY TCU**</span>: "UJN, A010"

!!! tip

>     Remember that IFR aircraft are only separated from other IFR or SVFR aircraft in class D. You should *generally* be able to issue a clearance for an approach and use other separation methods (visual separation, holding a departure on the ground) if separation is required with these aircraft.

Author: This is how we have it to be standardised with all other Class D towers. Essentially so the tower knows that all coordinated IFR arrivals have been cleared for the approach. Would this cause any issues at YSBK?

>     Remember that IFR aircraft are only separated from other IFR or SVFR aircraft in class D. You should *generally* be able to issue a clearance for an approach and use other separation methods (visual separation, holding a departure on the ground) if separation is required with these aircraft.

Reviewer: 99% of IFR arrivals are from Class G at BK rather than CTA. So, control instruction to an Acft OCTA, probably doesn't work. 

However, an Acft does require clearance for an INST APCH prior to handoff.

This differs from somewhere like PF, where 99% of IFR arrivals are via PAL, and call PF TWR assigned A015V day / A018 night (or cleared INST APCH if applicable.

APP/ENR issuing VSA's removes TWR's ability to use levels as a form of Separation/Segregation.

Not 100% sure we can actually standardize this between units, I'm sure other towers will also differ.

#### ADC 2 Online

> When ADC 2 is online, SY TCU may not be familiar with which controller owns what airspace. Best practice is to receive the coordination no matter what, and if it was meant for the other ADC controller, relay the coordination to them internally.

Author: I might just leave this in there, since ENR will probably coord to ADC 1 by default most of the time, just so the tower controllers know to distribute the information internally where required

### BK ADC Internal
BK ADC must heads-up coordinate **all aircraft** transiting from one ADC controller to the other.

!!! phraseology
    <span class="hotline">**BK ADC 2** -> **BK ADC**</span>: "via TWRN, EWY for an overhead join"  

>     <span class="hotline">**BK ADC** -> **BK ADC 2**</span>: "EWY, A015"

Reviewer: Can we incorporate Runway Dependency when using 29C/11C for departures / prohibition for opposite bases to adjacent runways  (29L/29C & 29C/29R)? Let me know if you need more info... just thought it'd be good for those keen

Author: Yeah could  you flesh this out a bit? Im a bit confused haha

Reviewer: Gets complicated... happy to leave it out, but here it is;

RWY Dependency;
The distance between adjacent Runways (Centrelines) at Bankstown does not meet the standard required for Independent Runway Operations. Actual distance 66m(?). Required distance for Single Engines = 60m, Multi-Engine = 90m, Jet = 120m (off the top of my head).

Because Single Engine aircraft are independent (above), you can use the runways independently (ie at the same time). However, the moment a Twin/Jet is involved, you require a runway standard with the adjacent runway(s) in addition the the runway in use. 

Note; only applies for departures (an exemption exists for arrivals, causing opposite base issue, more below)

My proposed clause would probably say something like;

(Departures Section)
"Due to the close proximity of parallel runways at Bankstown, runways are NOT independent for multi-engine and Jet aircraft. Controllers MUST apply a runway standard to the Runway(s) immediately adjacent when departing Multi-Engined or Jet Aircraft

Note; Arriving aircraft are exempt from this runway dependency.

For example; A C510 (Jet) is ready runway 29C. The controller must apply a separation standard to ALL 3 runways simultaneously when clearing this acft for take-off. However, clearing an aircraft to land (not touch and go) whilst the C510 departs on an adjacent runway is permitted.

Opposite Base;

CASA instrument exists permitting independent arrivals to adjacent runways, however (due to a midair 20 years ago), aircraft cannot BOTH make the turn to final in close proximity. Controllers must instead ensure at least one of the aircraft is established on final prior to entering conflicts, AND mutual traffic is passed in the event someone passes thru final

Suggested clause; 

Arrivals;
Due to high risk of collision and poor field of view during turns to final, Do NOT permit a pair aircraft to turn final simultaneously and/or in close proximity when assigned adjacent runways (EG; 29R & 29C, or 29C & 29L). Controllers should stagger base turns or issue 'go arounds' to solve conflicts.
This does not apply to aircraft pairing assigned adjacent where an aircraft is already established on final AND traffic has been passed to BOTH aircraft.

Author: Yep all makes sense.

Would be a bit of a bigger job though, we currently don't publish those sep standards anywhere, so we'd need to add those in too, and include some stuff in the moodle. Maybe something for down the line?

Reviewer: I'd be fine with that. Sep standard are already in place in other sections anyway, even if they aren't the smallest we can get (600m).
